BOY:
Ice is something we've all seen.
Whether it's ice on a lake
or ice in your glass.
All ice shares some
special properties.
But just what are
those properties?
And what makes ice so different
from other solids?
To find out, let's turn
to some people at NASA
who've made a career
out of studying ice.
Well, fundamentally,
you probably already know
what ice is.
It's that ice cube that's
in your freezer
or in your cold drink.
Ice at its most fundamental
is frozen water.
When water hits
a certain temperature,
which is 32 degrees Fahrenheit
or 0 degrees Celsius,
it freezes.
And here we have an example
of this: here's ice.
This ice was liquid water
not too long ago.
And it just reached a certain
temperature, and it expanded
and it froze
into this solid block.
NEUMANN:
Ice is important to our world
because it's one of the main
parts of the planet
that controls our climate:
how warm or how cool it is.
In the polar areas--
so, close to the North Pole,
close to the South Pole--
it's cold year-round,
and we find a lot of ice there.
And that ice affects what
our weather is like here
in the United States.
CAMERON:
When most solids are heated,
they melt into liquids.
When a liquid cools down,
it freezes into a solid.
But water is special,
because something very different
happens when it becomes a solid.
NEUMANN:
Ice is a really unique solid.
A lot of other liquids, as
they freeze and form a solid,
that solid is heavier
and it's dense
and it sinks down to
the bottom of the liquid.
But, as you know, your ice cube
floats in a glass of water.
So, when you freeze water
to make ice,
it's actually less dense
than the water.
And so it floats
right up on the top.
We have a glass of water,
just regular room-temperature
water, and we take ice--
which is 32 degrees or below.
And if we drop a couple ice
cubes in this water,
we see that
it definitely floats.
We see that it is definitely
less dense
than the liquid water.
CAMERON: But floating ice
is really important
for life on Earth, too.
If frozen water did not float,
it would sink to the bottom
of a lake or a pond,
or even the ocean.
The summer sun would melt some
of the ice, but not all of it.
Every year, more ice would sink
to the bottom until the lakes
and the rivers filled with ice
and became solid.
But ice floats in liquid water,
so our lakes and oceans don't
freeze from the bottom up.
Even in cold weather, living
things can still live
in the liquid water that
is under the ice.
Water, both liquid and solid,
makes our world
a special place to live.
(music playing)